# A Static Python Class for a Collection of Constants

### Introduction

Recently I changed jobs, making some professional changes that I've wanted to make for some time:
- Use something other than C# (or any .NET) as my main working language.
- Use Linux instead of Windows as my full time development OS.

Using Linux has been such a great change. It feels like clay that I can shape closely around my workflow - the more tricks I discover/apply, the more productive I become. However, that's not the topic of this post. My new work language is - Python.

I've written a lot of Python over the last three months, but just using a language doesn't bestow fluency in and of itself. It takes some time to absorb the idioms, but more than that, you actually need problems to solve that _require_ you to delve into the language facilities.

I was recently thinking about such a problem. This situation is not a great technical quandary, but it did motivate me into a deeper look at Python and in particular, Metaclasses.

### The Problem

My current contract involves a large scale, multi-part solution for acquiring, parsing and aggregating web data. The business domain is such that several data items must be one of a sizable list of constant values. At present these are stored in lists of strings. This works OK for determining whether a value is one of the list members, but means using string literals throughout - it requires memorisation/lookup of values, makes it hard to take advantage of intellisense and is error prone. A _Pythonic_ alternative could be to use a module containing all the constant values, but this makes testing for membership inelegant. A static (only) class, with constant members and some reflection-esque way of testing a value against the members is what we need.

So in summary the requirements are:
- A class encapsulating a collection of constants.
- The class must be static and cannot be instantiated.
- The constants cannot be modified outside of the class, including addition of new members.
- A value can be tested against the class to see if it is equal to one of the members.

Preventing instantiation is easily done by throwing an exception in \_\_new\_\_.

Customising access to members is possible via the Python special methods \_\_getattr\_\_, \_\_setattr\_\_ and \_\_delattr\_\_ described [here](http://docs.python.org/release/2.5.2/ref/attribute-access.html), but these are _instance_ methods. How do we recruit these for static members? I had an inkling that this could be done with a [Metaclass](http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Python_Programming/Metaclasses) based on my knowledge of them in Ruby. Although the concept is different in Python, I was right.

Finally, testing for membership in the collection is done via another special Python member, \_\_dict\_\_. 

### The Code

All in all, this is done with cogent brevity as follows. 
```python
# The metaclass allowing us to deal dynamically with getters and setters.
class ConstCollectionMetaclass(type):
    def __setattr__(self, name, value):
        self.__dict__[name] = value

    def __getattr__(self, name):
        if name in self.__dict__:
            return self.__dict__[name]
        else:
            raise NameError('Constant not found in collection: ' + name)

    def contains(self, value):
        return value in self.__dict__.values()


# The base implementation recruiting the metaclass and preventing instantiation.
class ConstCollection(object):
    __metaclass__ = ConstCollectionMetaclass

    def __new__(cls, *args, **kwargs):
        raise TypeError("Class 'ConstCollection' and derivations cannot be instantiated.")


# An example implementation.
class FootballCodes(ConstCollection):
    UK_FOOTBALL = 'Soccer'
    AU_FOOTBALL = 'Australian Rules'
    US_FOOTBALL = 'Gridiron'


# Check that it does what we expect.
if __name__ == "__main__":
    print FootballCodes.UK_FOOTBALL  # Soccer
    print FootballCodes.contains('Australian Rules')  # True
    print FootballCodes.contains('Rugby Union')  # False

    try:
        nz_football = FootballCodes.NZ_FOOTBALL
    except NameError, e:
        print e  # Constant not found in collection: NZ_FOOTBALL

    try:
        FootballCodes.NZ_FOOTBALL = 'Rugby Union'
    except TypeError, e:
        print e  # 'dictproxy' object does not support item assignment

    try:
        football_codes = FootballCodes()
    except TypeError, e:
        print e  # Class 'ConstCollection' and derivations cannot be instantiated.
```

Now I'm not sure this is strictly _Pythonic_, but it serves more as an intellectual exercise.
